Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. There are a number of awards given to
writers of science fiction and fantasy. The two best-known awards are the Hugo
and the Nebula, both given annually. But the winners are selected in very
different manners. The Hugo is voted on by people attending the World Science
Fiction Convention each year, so the selecting body would be made up mostly of
fans. And the Nebula is voted on only by members of the Science Fiction Writers
of America, in other words, the writers themselves. The Hugo is the oldest
award. It was first given in 1953, and today there are a number of categories a
writer can win in. He can win for a novel, a novella, a novelette, or a short
story. And there are also Hugos for movies, artists, editors, fan publications,
and so forth. The Nebula began in 1966, so it's a more recent award. It's given
each spring at the annual banquet of the Science Fiction Writers of America. And
that body consists of around 500 people, so the voting base for the award is
much smaller than it is for the Hugo. We asked one science fiction author, Jack
Chalker, which award was the most prestigious. The Hugo, because it's been
around now so long, and it's had so much publicity, and it's been so well
promoted by the industry, is generally recognized by the regular science fiction
book-line public, most of whom do not know how the Hugo was actually given. The
fact is that I remember one Hugo winner who said that when she got on the train
to go home, she had her Hugo with her under her arm. She wasn't going to let it
go. And the conductor on the train looked down and said, Isn't that a Hugo? So,
you know, in other words, basically, obviously the conductor reads science
fiction. And he recognized the award, he just did not recognize. He didn't know
anything about how it was awarded or anything else, but he knew it was an
enormously prestigious award. Therefore, putting Hugo award-winning author on
the front of a book means that these non-fans will recognize this as something
single-out of exceptional. They will buy it. Because it's the best-known award,
Chalker says, it means a good deal of money to an author. It's worth quite a lot
of money to someone who has not won one. I doubt it seriously whether it would
mean a dime to an Asimov, or an Arthur Clarke, or Robert Heinlein. You know,
these people already have their wide market. But it means an awful lot to
particularly first-time winners. And it means that the publisher knows that by
putting this on there, they're automatically going to have sales of two or three
times what they would have otherwise without even bothering to promote it. And,
of course, you are going to promote it. It gives you promotion money as well.
Which means that I believe somebody's estimated that the minimum worth for Hugo,
the minimum worth is around $50,000. Finally, we asked his opinion on the two
awards. Which would a professional writer like himself prefer to receive? I
think the Hugo is more desired. I think the Hugo is, as I say, commercially
recognized. The Nebula, unfortunately, is... It sounds great. You know, it's an
award given by the science fiction writers to themselves. But because it's such
a small group that does it, and because of an inordinately complex and
ridiculous system of nominations and a lot of politicking, Oscar-style
politicking and everything else, it really boils down to cliques of friends
being able to nominate themselves year after year. And the Nebula is quite often
won by a mere 40 votes. No matter which award a story may have won, Hugo or
Nebula, it'll be a good one.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. We produce the Science Fiction Radio Show
because we feel that science fiction and fantasy is the most exciting and
significant literature of our time. And its popularity is more than obvious. Go
into any bookstore. You'll find that the science fiction section is the largest
one there. And a science fiction movie, Star Wars, is the single greatest money
earner in Hollywood history, presently reaching toward a billion dollars gross.
Our show is produced to keep you informed on what's happening in science fiction
and fantasy. We'll interview authors, for instance, both new ones and
established ones. We'll review books and movies, previewing what will be coming
out, highlighting what's here now, and discussing significant work from the
past. And we'll also talk with movie producers, agents, publishers, anyone
involved with science fiction and fantasy. And scientists, too. We'll
occasionally interview people from NASA, for instance, and other scientists
working in areas such as robots and computers that current science fiction is
dealing with.
We feel that science fiction is not only an exciting literature of adventure and
escape, but we're convinced that it speaks to our present society in a vital and
necessary way. A new and highly popular science fiction author, C.J. Cherry,
told us why she thinks science fiction and fantasy are valuable. The value of
science fiction is essentially the broadening of vision. The broadening of
vision in time, because we do not really concern ourselves only with the future.
This is why fantasy, which deals with past ages, has been quite as comfortable
in associating with science fiction as it has. On the one hand, it should seem
very strange to find fantasy readers and science fiction readers trading books.
We'd think that we had nothing to say to each other. But in point of fact, we
have all the world to say to each other. We have all of human experience to say
to each other. We have the long view, one sort of being the memory of mankind
and the other being the hope and the aspiration of where we will go and what we
will do. Two sides of the same coin. Cherry also believes that science fiction
and fantasy can put humanity into perspective, so to speak, can somehow show us
our place and our common unity. It's a kind of literature that widens the
experience beyond one's daily life. It shows us the true size of the earth, the
true size of the universe, the true importance of our troubles, both the size
and complexity of them and sometimes the extreme simplicity of them. It gives us
perspective in dealing with the world around us and with each other and shows us
that we have, in many instances, a good deal more in common than we do in
difference.
Another popular science fiction writer, Frederick Pohl, spoke to us on the value
of science fiction. Pohl has been in the field for some 50 years, not only as a
best-selling writer, but as an agent, editor, and critic. He talks about one of
science fiction's unique attributes. I think science fiction has special
qualifications to act as a vehicle for discussing anything that affects the
human being. It's a way of looking at the human race from outside objectively.
It's a way of, it's a sort of game-playing mechanism for seeing what would
happen to human beings under conditions that haven't occurred yet but are very
possible. And I think that that's probably one of the strongest factors
accounting for the continual growth and interest in science fiction that seems
to have been going on as long as I've been alive. We'll continue next time with
some more views on science fiction and fantasy.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction
Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. Why do people read science fiction? We asked
that question of two of science fiction's newest and most popular authors, Jack
Chalker and C.J. Cherryh. Jack Chalker comments first. Why people pick up science
fiction and fantasy, I think, is because, first and foremost, because they want
an escape. Because they really don't like, you know, I mean, you look at the
evening news, you read the papers, you know, 20 dead in El Salvador this
morning. They're seeing 15 house fires set by mad arsonists downtown. Rape is
up. You know, all of this kind of thing. They're scared to go down the street in
many of the cities and so on these days after dark. Seems like problems,
problems, problems. Unemployment lines. And then you can pick up science fiction
or fantasy and you can jump into that other world. And you can become a part of
it and you can be something else, be somewhere else. So it's the ultimate escape
literature. And, of course, once we've got you in the escape literature, then we
sneak in the serious stuff. C.J. Cherryh has many of the same ideas, but she
provides a little different perspective in her answer. It's curiosity. It's a
wish to be in touch with one's environment, one's real environment.
There are so many people who go through their daily lives concerned only with
what happens in the office and what happens around them. And it's sort of like
being locked in one's cell if you never see beyond that. Nature and the universe
have so much more to it than what you perceive if you limit your vision to your
immediate time and your immediate place and your immediate circumstance.
And there's a certain nobility in ordinary daily affairs. It's
the nature of the universe. I do not deny that. But I think that the real
understanding of what actually goes on in these ordinary daily affairs only
comes through a wider understanding of the universe as a whole. And this is what
I think draws people to science fiction, to fantasy, to this whole vast realm of
a romantical or positive way of looking at the universe, which has been in the
mainstream of thought since literature began.
Both Cherryh and Chalker feel that science fiction or fantasy is almost
impossible to define. It's such a broad, all-encompassing form that it just
can't be pinned down. Cherryh, however, offers some ideas on what science fiction
is. I think the best one that ever came up was Roger Zelazny's definition, at
least I believe it's his, I don't know from whom he may have gotten it, but it's
basically that if I ever discover a definition of science fiction, I shall
immediately attempt to violate it. Science fiction, to me, is a, will always
remain an experimental literature. It does not have rules, except to try to
adhere to science and to true things as much as possible, and to try to have
your research well-founded in at least the best possible understanding of what's
going on that you can arrive at. To me, science fiction is the same thing that
the unknown writer of the Gilgamesh epic did. A voyage in search of the unknown,
this sort of literature. Next time, we'll talk to some writers who go back to
the pulp era of science fiction in the early part of this century.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Joan Vinge began writing in 1974 and has
already won two Hugo Awards, one for the novella Eyes of Amber, and most
recently for her novel The Snow Queen. The Snow Queen was Vinci's first full
-length novel, and she told us that it was quite an undertaking. That book was
quite an incredible thing for me to write that book, because it wound up being
about, it was over 600 pages of manuscript. It's almost 200,000 words long. And
when I started writing it, I had never written a complete novel all at once.
With Outcasts of Heaven, that was a novella, and then I had increased
in size to that of a novel. And I was feeling kind of daunted about the very
idea of writing a normal, what I thought would be a normal-length novel of about
200 pages. But I finally did sit down and start to write it. And the more I
wrote, the more I realized that it was not going to stop at 200 pages. I think I
had gotten through 100 pages and realized that I had barely gotten into the plot
at all, my writing. And from then on, I could only just go on and write and
write and write and write and see where it led me. It got more and more
complicated as it went along, until I really just stared at times that I would
ever be able to finish the thing.
As in a lot of science fiction, Vinge had to create the world on which the story
unfolds. This task required her to design a believable world and the people who
populate it. She told us how she developed the background material for the main
city in the story and how some of the characters evolved. Well, I did a fair
amount of background work beforehand, but actually I wound up doing a great deal
of the work, I think, during the process of writing the book. I had conceived of
the idea of the wicked city of Carbuncle, which gets its name because it's
either a jewel or a fester, depending on your point of view. But I wanted it to
be sort of a place where all kinds of cultures from all kinds of worlds came
together and mixed and mingled. And in trying to make a portrait of the city, I
needed a lot of different characters with a lot of different backgrounds behind
them. And so whenever
I needed a new character, I would write one into the story, and then I'd have to
figure out where they came from. So frequently I don't lay everything out before
I actually start to write a book. I have kind of a basic structure, which I
think it was being sort of like a trellis, and then the story is a line that
grows up through it and fills it in and flushes it out and things. She told us
that sometimes her characters take on a life of their own. One of the characters
who comes from a very advanced society, the most technologically dominant
society in the book, started out as a walk-on character. His name is Gundhalinu,
and he came along with one of the major characters in the book, in the scene,
and he just started acting up. And out of his personality, I kind of saw a whole
cultural stereotype growing. And I realized actually part of where he came from
was that I had been reading a lot of books about, I've been reading some fiction
books about Romans in Britain, because I've always been fascinated by Romans in
Britain as part of the archaeology thing, I guess. And just the kind of
fascination was the sort of science fictional reversal, where the highly
cultured people are the people who too often wind up in sword and sorcery
fantasies, the kind of dark and swarthy people. And they're usually spelunking
around in the bushes, but they were the people who were suave and sophisticated
and on top, and the people with red hair and freckles and green eyes were
running around like howling barbarians in the brush. And I thought that was a
delightful twist. Next time, more about the Snow Queen with Joan Vinge.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Last time we discussed how Joan Vinge
developed the background material for her award-winning novel, The Snow Queen.
She did an elaborate job of laying out the locale over which her story took
place. She also had some very interesting characters for the reader to enjoy.
Hans Christian Andersen wrote a fairy tale also called The Snow Queen. We asked
if she used a fairy tale as a basis for her novel. Yes, it is. As a matter of
fact, that was my original inspiration for the book. There's a cartoon, an
animated movie of The Snow Queen, which they occasionally show on television. I
was interested in it. You know, I had first seen that movie when I was in about
eighth grade and thought, oh, this is silly. But when I saw it again back during
the 70s sometime, I realized what an interesting fairy tale it is. The thing
about most fairy tales is that they are frequently degenerate mythology. And if
you know any particular amount about Near Eastern and European mythology, you
see a lot of symbolic archetypes. You see ravens and stags and the wicked
stepmother and the sweet young innocent and things like that. Which, you know,
they all actually have their archetypes back in European and Near Eastern
mythology. Vinge's interest in Andersen's fairy tale goes beyond his retelling
of an old myth. There were some specific concepts in his story that appealed to
her. One of the criticisms of science fiction is its portrayal of women. While
designing a novel around the story in Andersen's fairy tale, Vinge chose to
dispel some of those criticisms. She explains how. And the thing that interested
me especially about this particular tale was that there was no prince in it.
It's usually prince who gets to do all the fun and exciting things like fighting
the dragons and things like that. And waking up the sleeping maiden and the
women in the story are usually either the wicked old witch or some helpless
simpering creature. And, you know, I get sort of bored with that kind of thing.
But I was very interested. This book was quite a twist because, or this fairy
tale was quite a twist because all the main roles in it were played by women.
The basic idea of the story is that there are a little girl and a little boy who
are friends. And the little boy is stolen away by the Snow Queen, who is kind of
an elemental goddess of winter. And most of the story concerns the little girl's
travels as she's searching for him and all the people she meets. And the people
she meets are virtually all female. And the people in positions of power in the
story are women. And I thought that was quite interesting and unique. And I was
in the mood to do a story in which women played major roles in the book. And so
I thought that was a good jumping off point for her. Vinge's background in
archaeology is probably the reason why the societies and cultures of her
characters are so well developed. The background of a character usually holds
the reasons and motivations for his or her behavior. Combine her background in
archaeology with a semi-mythical society, starships and high technology, a lost
lover and the quest to find that lost lover, and you've got Joan Vinge's The
Snow Queen. She commented on what she was attempting when she wrote the story. I
didn't want to write a fantasy, though. I didn't want to just make it a
retelling of the fairy tale, basically. I really wanted it to be a whole new
story, and I wanted it to be science fiction as well, because that's just the
way my brain works, I guess. I have written a couple of fantasy stories
recently, and I've always enjoyed reading fantasy as well as science fiction,
but so far the majority of my work has been at least technically science
fiction. In The Snow Queen, Joan Vinge has displayed her depth as a writer. She
developed a complex society but retained an interesting storyline, and her story
follows the main characters all over the galaxy without losing track of any of
them. Even though The Snow Queen is somewhat longer than most books, it easily
holds the reader's attention. Vinge has done a fine job with her novel, and it
is well deserving of its high praise and awards.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.